# Lab 04: Parsing to AST

[[RU](README.ru.md)|EN]

This lab will use the grammar from the [previous lab](../lab03/README.md) to build an [*Abstract Syntax Tree*][AST] for the subsequent excercises.

## Goal

Note that the way the `calculate` function was implemented in Lab 01 through 03 is called *interpretation*: there is a code written in the "host language" that evaluates the parse tree in runtime and applies the operations stored there.

Many modern languages don't follow this approach. Instead, there is a *translation* process involved - converting a program in one language to an equivalent program in a different language.

Even though the translation process can be based immediately on parse tree generated by the Ohm library, this is not the common way to do it.

The real compilers do apply quite a few transformations to the syntax trees found in the original source code before generating the output.
Building the Abstract Syntax Tree out of "our" nodes, not the ones auto-generated by a third-party library, provides us with the necessary flexibility.

We would also export the AST node types for the next labs in this course.

## Tasks

1. Implement an AST by defining types for all the expression kinds in [ast.ts](src/ast.ts). The root type should be named `Expr`, rest is up to the student discretion.
2. Implement a semantic action `parse()` at [parser.ts](src/parser.ts) that converts the parse result provided by the Ohm library into this AST
3. Implement a wrapper function `parseExpr(string)` at [parser.ts](src/parser.ts) that passes the input string through the grammar and builds the AST using the semantic action mentioned above.
4. Implement a "reverse" of the parse process in the function named `printExpr` defined in the [printExpr.ts](src/printExpr.ts)

## Evaluation

- C | 3 | Hey, Not Too Rough:
  - Support all the expression nodes in parsing
- B | 4 | Hurt Me Plenty:
  - Skip printing the non-necessary parentheses

## Hints

1. There are a few ways to represent the AST in the Typescript's type system. See [ast.md](ast.md) for a more detailed discussion
2. Detection of the parentheses necessity might be tricky. Remember that the parentheses is used to *override* the operation priority and/or associativity. Therefore deciding whether to put a parentheses requires comparing the *context* where an expression is used with the operation this expression represents.
3. Passing a context information requires extra parameters. A straightforward way to do this would be adding a separate recursive function. However, TS/JS supports some flexibility in the function definition: it is possible to add some *extra* parametes to the `printExpr` function signature as long as those parameters are *optional*. This would allow using just a single function for the export and for the recursive descent.

[AST]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree
